* Committee looks at 600 studies* Most research finding link not well designed, experts sayBy NEW YORK, April 18 (Reuters) - For 20 years, researchers
have reported a link between gum disease and heart attacks or
stroke, but a new analysis finds that claim seriously flawed -
so much so that the American Heart Association (AHA) issued a
rare "scientific statement" on Wednesday concluding that gum
disease has not been shown to raise the risk of, let alone
cause, cardiovascular illness.Moreover, the statement continued, treating gum disease
either professionally or by regular brushing and flossing has
not been proven to reduce the risk of heart disease or stroke.The statement, published in the AHA journal Circulation,
reflects a three-year analysis of about 600 studies by an expert
committee, led by a dentist and a cardiologist. It was endorsed
by The American Dental Association Council on Scientific
Affairs."There is a lot of confusion and misinformation, with many
in dentistry and cardiology developing a strong opinion that
there was a connection," said Peter Lockhart, professor and
chair of oral medicine at the Carolinas Medical Center in
Charlotte, N.C., who co-chaired the expert panel. "That's a
distortion of the facts. The scientific evidence points in the
other direction."Because there have been hundreds of studies on the subject,
Lockhart said, "If there were a strong causal link between
atherosclerosis and periodontal disease, or if atherosclerosis
could be cleared up by treating periodontal disease, we'd know
it by now."Countless health websites and books, not to mention the
popular press, nevertheless declare that periodontal disease is
a risk factor for heart disease and stroke. Indeed, hundreds of
studies have pointed in that direction.Most of those studies are problematic, however, because they
were observational. That is, they found that people with heart
disease, or those who had suffered a heart attack or stroke,
were more likely than heart-healthy people to have gum disease.But that association does not necessarily reflect a causal
link, explains cardiologist Ann Bolger of the University of
California, San Francisco. Instead, several factors can
independently raise the risk of both kind of illness; they
include age, smoking, obesity, diabetes, low socioeconomic
status and being male.Another problem, which besets many areas of medicine, said
Lockhart, is that "negative studies aren't published." That is,
research that fails to find an association between gum disease
and cardiovascular problems is less likely to be submitted to or
accepted by a journal.Besides correcting the scientific record, the AHA panel
hopes that publicizing its conclusion will help people. Most
important, said Bolger, if people understand that periodontal
disease does not raise their risk of heart attack and stroke
they can focus on what does, such as smoking, obesity, high
blood pressure, and stress.A CREDIBLE EXPLANATIONThe gum-heart link seemed more credible than many
associations identified by observational studies, largely
because there was a plausible mechanism. Gum disease is marked
by bacterial infection, and mouth bacteria enter the blood
stream more easily where the gums are diseased.Bacterial infections can increase inflammation, and the link
between atherosclerosis and inflammation "is well established,"
wrote the AHA panel, "with consistent associations" between
blood levels of inflammation and increases in heart attacks and
strokes caused by blood clots."But just because something seems to make sense doesn't mean
it's true," said Bolger. "You need to prove it."Studies trying to do that have produced contradictory
results. Some have found oral bacteria in the plaques that make
up atherosclerosis, as well as in heart valves. Others have not.
Some have found more oral bacteria in the arteries of people
with healthy gums than in those with severe gum disease. That,
said the AHA report, "argues against a causal role of direct
periodontal pathogen invasion."Anyone diving into medical journals could easily come away
thinking otherwise. A 2009 study from Harvard School of Public
Health concluded that "oral disease was associated with excess
cardiovascular disease risk, independent of genetic factors." A
2008 study by scientists at Columbia University Medical Center
noted that "periodontal disease has been associated with
cardiovascular disease," with inflammation being the most likely
link.A 2008 study from Sweden linked  periodontal disease to a
nearly six-fold increase in the risk of heart disease. A 2007
study from Italy concluded that "deep pockets" in the gums and
other symptoms of periodontal disease "seem to be important risk
factors for cardiovascular diseases." A 2003 study from the U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs found that "periodontal disease
appears to be associated with a 19 percent increase in risk of
future cardiovascular disease."Unfortunately, the AHA panel concluded after scrutinizing
hundreds of such studies that "a lot of the claims break down
because the studies were not designed well," said Lockhart.
"They were too small or were flawed in some other way." And a
close read shows that the studies found only "associations," not
a cause-and-effect connection between gum disease and heart
disease.Not everyone jumped on the gum disease-heart disease
bandwagon. Online calculators offered by the American Heart
Association and the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute do
not include gum disease as a risk factor. In 2009, the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force concluded that "the current
evidence is insufficient" to say that periodontal disease raises
the risk of coronary heart disease.In contrast, some commercial sites promise that preventing
gum disease by flossing "may protect your heart" and "may
protect your arteries."On its website, the American Academy of Periodontology (AAP)
says, "Researchers have found that people with gum disease are
almost twice as likely to suffer from coronary artery disease."
It does not make an explicit causal claim, but notes that "oral
bacteria can affect the heart when they enter the blood stream,
attaching to fatty plaques in the coronary arteries," which "may
lead to heart attacks."AAP President Pamela McClain, a periodontist in Aurora,
Colorado, agreed that research has "not been able to say that
periodontal disease causes cardiovascular disease." Gum disease
"is a risk factor, and observational studies have supported an
association but not a causal one." She said she did not see a
need to revise the group's website.	
	
 (Editing by  and )