* Cancer supplants heart disease as No. 1 killer* Shift linked to lower age of U.S Hispanics vs.
non-Hispanics (Reuters) - Cancer has replaced heart
disease as the leading cause of death among U.S. Hispanics,
likely reflecting the large number of young, working-age
Hispanics in America, according to a report by the American
Cancer Society released on Monday.The shift mirrors a larger national trend as death rates
from cancer and heart disease start to converge, Becky Siegel,
an epidemiologist for the organization, said in a telephone
interview.Siegel said death rates for heart disease have been
declining more rapidly than for cancer, helped by better
treatments for heart problems such as cholesterol-lowering
statin drugs.In the United States, Hispanics tend to be younger,
working-age adults, and since heart disease typically afflicts
older adults, the study's results are not surprising."In the U.S. overall, cancer is the leading cause of death
among people younger than 85," Siegel said.Hispanics are the fastest-growing demographic group in the
United States, accounting for 16.3 percent of the U.S.
population, or 50.5 million of the 310 million Americans.In 2009, the most recent year for which data are available,
29,935 Hispanics died of cancer compared to 29,611 deaths from
heart disease. Among non-Hispanic whites and African Americans,
heart disease remains the leading cause of death.The report estimates that in 2012, some 33,200 Hispanics
will die from cancer and 112,800 will be newly diagnosed with
the disease.Even so, cancer rates among Hispanics have been falling at a
faster rate than in non-Hispanics in the past decade. According
to the report, cancer deaths between 2000 and 2009 fell by 2.3
percent per year in men and 1.4 percent per year in women.That compared with annual declines of 1.5 percent and 1.3
percent among non-Hispanic white men and women, respectively.Hispanics tend to suffer from different types of cancers
than other Americans and have lower rates of the four most
common cancers - breast, prostate, lung and colon - than
non-Hispanic whites.The differences are especially stark in lung cancer, where
rates among Hispanics are about half of those among non-Hispanic
whites. Much of that has to do with historically lower rates of
smoking among Hispanics, especially those from Mexico.By contrast, U.S. Hispanics are much more likely to have
cancers of the stomach, liver, cervix and gallbladder."These cancers that are associated with infectious agents
are four times more common in Latin America than they are in
North America," Siegel said. "They are bringing basically this
cancer risk with them from their home countries."Siegel said better screening for these cancers could make a
big difference in reducing the incidence of the disease among
Hispanics.(Reporting by , editing by Philip Barbara)