 Feb 24 Women with genetic mutations
that increase their risk of ovarian cancer have fewer years than
physicians thought to make the difficult choice of having their
ovaries removed to prevent the often-fatal disease, according to
a study published on Monday.Current guidelines give such women by age 40 to decide, but
the study's Canadian authors now recommend that decision be made
by 35. earlier.Women with BRCA1 mutations who wait until after age 35 to
have a "prophylactic oophorectomy" face a five-times higher
likelihood of developing ovarian cancer than those who have the
surgery by that age, according to the study of 5,783 women,
which was published in the Journal of Clinical Oncology. They
also face a four-times higher risk of premature death compared
to women who have the surgery by age 35.Overall, oophorectomy reduced the risk of ovarian cancer by
80 percent and the risk of premature death from any cause by 77
percent."For women with BRCA1 mutations, these results suggest that
surgery should be performed as soon as it is practical," said Dr
Don Dizon, a spokesman for the American Society of Clinical
Oncology. The surgery "carries long-lasting benefits,
substantially reducing ovarian cancer risk as well as total
mortality risk."BRCA1 and BRCA2 are widely known as breast cancer genes, and
women with a mutation in one or both often decide to have their
breasts removed so they do not develop that disease. Last year
actress Angelina Jolie went public with her decision to undergo
prophylactic mastectomy after she tested positive for a BRCA
mutation.Mutations in the same genes also increase the risk of
ovarian cancer. Removing the ovaries is not only major surgery,
like mastectomy, but also triggers menopause. And it makes
conceiving children impossible."Our strongest instincts are for survival and reproduction,
and women facing this decision have to balance those," said Dr
Noah Kauff, director of ovarian cancer screening and prevention
at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City who
was not involved in the new study.In a 2008 study he and colleagues found that 64 percent of
women with the mutations opt to have their ovaries removed. By
comparison, 25 percent to 40 percent have a prophylactic
mastectomy.The findings about the benefit of ovary removal by age 35
apply to women with mutations in the BRCA1 gene, not BRCA2,
suggesting that the latter women may delay such surgery.WEIGHING RISKSCurrent guidelines give women a few more years to make the
difficult decision. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists recommends that the 1 in 300 to 800 women with a
BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation be offered prophylactic ovary removal by
age 40 or when childbearing is complete. The National
Comprehensive Cancer Network recommends an age of 35 to 40.Studies that support those recommendations found that
prophylactic oophorectomy reduces the risk of developing breast
and ovarian cancers in women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. But
the new research is the first to show a reduction in overall
mortality."To me, waiting to have oophorectomy until after 35 is too
much of a chance to take," said Dr Steven Narod of the
University of Toronto, who led the study. "These data are so
striking that we believe prophylactic oophorectomy by age 35
should become a universal standard for women with BRCA1
mutations."Other experts are not so sure.For one thing, the risk of ovarian cancer in BRCA1 women who
waited until 40 to have their ovaries removed was still small:
1.5 percent. It was 3.8 percent for women who had the operation
in their 40s and 14.2 percent in women who waited until 50. For
women without a BRCA mutation, the lifetime risk of ovarian
cancer is 1.4 percent."We've always known that the earlier oophorectomy is
performed, the greater the protection against both breast and
ovarian cancer," said Kauff. "But you don't fall off a cliff at
age 35 or even 40."The study, he warned, may overestimate the benefits of early
oophorectomy.Women who had an oophorectomy before age 35 but nevertheless
developed an aggressive cancer and died soon thereafter were
unlikely to be among the 5,783 in the study, he pointed out
since they were already dead. The study was therefore blind to
these women's bad outcome despite early oophorectomy and as a
result overestimated the benefit of pre-35 surgery.But even with that caveat, Kauff said, "The risk of ovarian
cancer probably rises 1 to 2 percent for every year you wait
beyond 40" to have an oophorectomy. 

 (Reporting by Sharon Begley; Editing by Julie Steenhuysen and
Cynthia Osterman)