 (Reuters Health) - Many gay, bisexual and queer men
who are good candidates for a drug that prevents HIV don't
believe their risk of being infected with the virus is high
enough to warrant the drug's use, suggests a new study.The poor perception of HIV risk suggests people need to be
educated about how to lower the chance of being infected,
according to the researchers, who do HIV testing and other
research in commercial sex venues in New York City."Our testers and counselors were always amazed that a lot of
these guys underestimated their risk for HIV - anecdotally,"
said Dr. Demetre Daskalakis, the study's senior author and
medical director of ambulatory HIV services at Mount Sinai
Hospital in New York City."It seemed as if it would be an opportune time to ask the
population where they were in accessing their own risk given
that PrEP was recently approved," he said.PrEP, which stands for pre-exposure prophylaxis, is a way
for people who are at risk of HIV but not infected to prevent
infection by taking a pill every day. The pill currently
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for PrEP is
Truvada, which is manufactured by Gilead.The risk of contracting HIV is up to 92 percent lower among
people who take PrEP consistently, compared to those who don't
take the medicine, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC).Currently, more than 1.1 million people in the U.S. are
living with HIV, but about 16 percent are unaware of their
infection, according to the Department of Health and Human
Services.Daskalakis and his colleagues write in the journal LGBT
Health that more than half of new HIV infections diagnosed in
the U.S. are attributed to unprotected sex between men.They write that the use of PrEP remains low despite its
ability to reduce the risk of HIV infection.For the new study, the researchers had men attending two
bathhouses and a sex club in New York City fill out
questionnaires about their sexual behaviors to find out whether
they would be candidates for PrEP. They also asked people if
they thought their sexual behavior warranted the use of PrEP.The data were collected from 629 men between June 2011 and
June 2012.The men were considered eligible for PrEP if they met the
entry criteria for iPrEX, one of the largest clinical trials of
the drug. Some of those criteria include having anal sex with
three or more partners, having condomless anal sex with a
partner who is HIV positive or of unknown status and getting a
recent diagnosis of a sexually transmitted infection (STI).Overall, 505 men who were questioned met the PrEP criteria,
but of those men who answered questions about their
self-perceived risk 78 percent said their behaviors didn't
warrant its use."It wasn't a big shock, because people who have been working
on the project in the field doing HIV testing always remark that
self-assessment of risk was pretty low," Daskalakis said.On the other hand, there was a small proportion of men who
said their behaviors made them candidates for PrEP. Of those
men, over 90 percent were right and did meet the criteria to use
the pill."If you look at our data and look at the other side, the
people who think they're candidates usually are," Daskalakis
said.While men attending bathhouses and sex clubs in New York
City do not represent the behavior of all gay, bisexual and
queer men across the country, other recent research at STI
clinics reports the phenomenon of low self-perceived risk.Dr. Albert Liu said his team's research in Miami, San
Francisco and Washington, D.C. showed a substantial number of
men who decline PrEP report behaviors that may put them at risk
for HIV infection.Liu is the director of HIV prevention and intervention
studies at Bridge HIV within the San Francisco Department of
Public Health. He was not involved with the new study.He added that his group's research also shows that about 60
percent of men agree to take PrEP when it's offered as part of a
comprehensive prevention program."I think the research does suggest there could be room for
improvement in terms of improving people's risk perception," Liu
said. "At the same time, when we offered PrEP to people who are
eligible, there are high levels of uptake."Daskalakis said people should look at their own risks and
ask if PrEP is something they should consider. People with a
healthcare provider should discuss their sexual behaviors with
their provider, he said, and those without a healthcare provider
should get one.More information on PrEP can be found on the CDC's websites
(see here: )Daskalakis said the pill costs between $1,200 and $1,500 per
month, but is covered by most insurance. The manufacturer also
offers an assistance program. He added that people sometimes
report bloating and flu-like symptoms when first taking Truvada
and doctors should monitor PrEP patients for kidney function and
bone loss."The side effects of Truvada exist and are things to worry
about but the side effects of HIV are also not so good,"
Daskalakis said.SOURCE:  LGBT Health, online June 17,
2014.